---
layout: post
title: "Graduation from Jacobs University"
description:
tags:
- graduation
categories:
- blog
permalink: /2007/06/01/graduation_2007/
lang: en
image:
  feature: http://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/5341489/images/throw-hats_crop.png
  caption: 
  captionlink: 
  credit: 
  creditlink: 
  location: 
  locationlink:
---

Today is the day that the three years of studying Integrated Social Sciences at Jacobs University Bremen are over: 
it is our [Graduation](http://www.jacobs-university.de/graduation2007/) Day, and we are headed for a day of speeches and celebrations, including keynote address by Klaus J. Jacobs, founder of the [Jacobs Foundation](http://www.jacobsfoundation.org) which as recently endowed my alma mater with a multi-million Euros donation.

{{ excerpt_separator }}

After three years, what is the bottom line? 
I have had, and still have a number of reservations towards Jacobs, some of which I share with many colleagues. 
At times, I missed systematic quality management, and feared that the universities commitment to excellence may be fading, at least in some areas. 
I have experienced, like many of my colleagues that an intercultural experience of the sort that Jacobs has to offer is a great opportunity, but not an easy one – and the university seemed not always willing and able to address these controversies. 
The new leadership, Prof. Dr. Joachim Treusch, to me, seemed more determined to address these issues that are halting the progress of Jacobs University Bremen. 
If his enthusiasm is any indication, he will be a great leader and manager throughout the future evolution of this young institution, founded only in 2001. 
Not the least because of substantial endowment recently received from the Jacobs Foundation, the university seems to be on the route to success again, now.

My criticism notwithstanding, for me, Jacobs University Bremen certainly was a success story and the best choice for my undergraduate education.

Coming from the public Freie Universität Berlin to Jacobs University in 2004, I was disappointed by disinterested teaching and anonymous – if any – interaction with teachers and classmates and therefore determined to leave university as soon as possible and engage myself in a professional career. 
The experience at Jacobs has not only changed my skepticism towards university education and helped me revise many of the (mis)conceptions previously held – it has also inspired an interest in genuine research in me, to the degree that I am now considering a career in academia. 

For this experience, I am particularly grateful to the faculty at Jacobs, many of whom are extremely dedicated teachers. 
I am grateful for their support during my time at what is now Jacobs University. 
I owe much of what I have attained to their efforts in teaching, academic advising and thoughtful feedback. 

The promising choices for my future education I am now faced with are a result of the development I have undergone at Jacobs University. 
In 2004, I would not only have lacked the education and skills, but maybe more importantly, also the motivation to pursue these tracks. 

Jacobs has been a very challenging but also inspiring experience that has helped me expand my intellectual horizon and my academic ambition. 

Jacobs for me, has opened new doors, incited my ambition and, yes, “scaled new heights”, as they say. 

At the same time, I am aware, that while being an innovative enterprise in German, and maybe international tertiary education, Jacobs University continues to be an opportunity that, need-blind admission notwithstanding, with tuition fees of 20,000 Euro per annum, is not open to everyone. 
Like so much of the educational system in Germany, it is socially selective – and it may be too easy to blame the university for this fact, as they appear to be trying hard to alleviate this selection bias, within the limits that a private institution has.

Maybe more important than learning from dedicated professors, was the personal exchange with my colleagues, some of whom have grown to be close friends over years. 
I can confidently say that I have hardly ever met such a diverse, talented and open-minded bunch of people as at Jacobs, and their companionship has continued to motivate and inspire me over the years. 
I feel privileged to have shared the Jacobs experience with my colleagues and friends.

After all, the Jacobs years may have been sleep-deprived, but mostly, it was more than worthwhile.